from MFE quickly introduce themselves, because they're here to answer
anything particularly technical.
Yeah. Good morning, Sarah Kenwood. I'm the manager, the HSNO policy manager at MFE.
And morning, I'm Julie Everett-Hates.
I'm a principal advisor to this program.
Yeah. Thank you very much. Appreciate it.
It's an early start for everyone today.
But look, I just would like to acknowledge from the outset
that I did come into this portfolio quite late once the policy
work had already largely been done.
So my role now really is to shepherd the bill through the parliamentary process,
which I'm looking to you as my parliamentary colleagues for your help and
assistance with that. But I'm really keen
to ensure that the draft as it is delivers on
its intended purpose, and that is very much how we improve the
operation of the system in practice.
So that's how I'm viewing it, as a system improvement bill.
The HSNO framework is and always will
be fundamentally about protecting people and communities
and the environment. But I think we have all heard, I know we all engage
in rural communities, we've all heard that aspects of that system have
become really complex, really cumbersome, burdensome, and don't
always achieve the purpose that user groups are looking for.
So it's very much about addressing those issues, but in
a measured and practical way. So what we're
trying to achieve at this point in time is by removing those
unnecessary barriers, improving the clarity for user
groups, reducing the duplication, which I'm sure you've all heard time and time
again,
and making that process as efficient as we can, but within
the really important and very stringent parameters of the environmental
protections that very much sit at the heart of this legislation.
So we're very much aiming for
system operations improvement.
I could go on, but in practical effect is
that the changes should mean, hopefully will mean,
that for farmers and growers particularly, they can access new
chemicals, biological controls, particularly for
pest protection, crop protection,
and also that the bill, as you've seen in the draft, it's aiming
to enable better use of the assessments from trusted
overseas regulators, in order, as I keep saying, to
reduce that duplication, to streamline the system, and then,
of course, to
apply our New Zealand specific safeguards.
But I don't want to talk at you, colleagues, so please, by all means,
feel free to ask some questions of Sarah, Julie, or myself.
Steve.
Yeah. Thank you for being here, Minister.
Yes.
Is it your
intent that the bill allow
greater leeway for determinations to be made around
the definition of new organisms?
Yeah, I was expecting that question to come up,
and I've seen a number of submitters have raised their
concerns about the gene technology and GMOs and the
potential overlap with that particular amendment
bill. These are very separate, very separate issues.
You'll note that the gene technology amendment bill has been
set on pause. So this specifically does
not change the regulatory settings for genetically
modified organisms, and it does not
expand what is currently allowed.
It doesn't alter that fundamental approach to regulating
the organisms. So if that clarifies, but equally, if you'd like
to ask the technical experts a bit more on that.
I'll ask a follow-up that might simplify it.
Okay.
So
if it was our finding that it did simplify that, then
you would be happy for us to propose amendments to
rein it back in so that it doesn't do more than what you just said?
I'd prefer to cross that bridge if and when we get to it.
But equally, would you like to perhaps comment on the possibility
that
finding a new way through?
Yeah, always open to finding new ways through.
Yeah.
And final one.
Yes, Steve.
Likewise,
it's not your intention that the bill allow a
more rapid pathway from
contained use of GMOs to environmental release of GMOs?
No.
No. Sorry, Minister.
Please.
Yeah. So
the same criteria, minimum standards, and other adverse
effects will be still assessed and considered to
make that assessment, whether it should be
released.
Okay.
Yeah.
Thank you.
Mark.
Morning, Minister. Sorry, I'm online.
Lovely to see you as always, Minister Greig.
You talk about duplication, and suffice it to say
duplication adds inherent costs.
Do you want to sort of enlighten those that are online what duplication we
currently are facing and how we might save money
and create economic activity if we remove said
duplication?
You want specific examples?
Well, not necessarily specific, but give some guidance to the listeners online that
what duplication we're currently facing and how we might alleviate that.
I might turn to Sarah for that question, Mark.
Thank you.
Yeah. Thanks, Sarah.
It's quite operational.
No, quite.
So I think
specifically what we're talking about with duplication is that the current model
requires a sort of one size fits all approach to
applications coming in. What we're proposing is a more risk-based and proportionate
approach, which means that for lower risk substances, you wouldn't have to
provide all of the information that you would, for example, for a new
Category C application.
It's being risk-based and proportionate,
reducing and streamlining some of the application pathways and
entry points. Not relaxing the risk
assessment of those or the precautionary approach
that the EPA takes in its consideration, but simply
smoothing the process to allow things to move more
quickly.
If that answers your question
It absolutely does. Thank you all, team.
I'm very grateful and lovely to see you.
Any further questions?
No, no, I'm fine, thank you, Mr. Chair.
No, it doesn't seem any further questions.
Is there any
final comments you'd like to make?
No, I was really just going to thank you for your consideration of
this. Look, we're open to improving the bill where we
possibly can, and obviously the technical experts are going to be here to
assist you along the way. But, thank you very much for taking your time
to consider this. I gather there's a lot of submissions for you to get through,
so, I'll look forward to your report back.
Thank you.
And thank you, Minister.
I'd just like to acknowledge former Speaker of the House and Minister
for Primary Industries, David Carter, who's in the audience as well.
Oh, David.
Welcome, David.
Negligent not doing that myself.
All right, have a good morning.
Thank you.
Right.
We'll kick on with hearing your evidence.
Now we've got, first up is Horticulture New Zealand.
If you'd like to come forward, please.
Morning.
Good morning.
Welcome to the Primary Production Select Committee.
We've allocated 15 minutes
for your presentation and questions, so the floor is in your hands.
Way to go.
Thank you. So, yeah, thank you for the opportunity to present.
I'm Rebecca Fisher. I'm from Horticulture New Zealand.
With me is Chung Wa Shen, and from our risk policy team,
and we're joined by Simon Cook, a kiwifruit grower, an avocado grower from the Bay
of Plenty, and also a registered chemical applicator.
Simon will provide practical examples from a grower's perspective.
We will briefly highlight two key points from our submission and then welcome
questions, so we'll definitely stick to time.
As you all know, HortNZ represents over 4,300 fruit and vegetable
growers who contribute over 7.5 billion to our economy.
The sector is enabling to double farm gate value by
2035, but this depends on growers having access to
efficacious crop protection products.
HortNZ supports the government's objectives of improving growers'
access to crop protection products, and as such, we do support the
direction of reform.
Our recommendations are intended to help ensure the bill delivers the
outcomes it was designed to achieve, while maintaining robust
environmental practices
and protections.
So I'd like to focus on three areas today.
The first, recognizing products approved by trusted
regulators overseas, as the previous speaker sort of covered.
New Zealand is a country of 5 million people.
We cannot realistically replicate the scientific capability of much
larger countries, nor can we expect companies to undertake bespoke,
extensive regulatory processes for such a small market as ours.
Recognizing products approved by trusted overseas regulators is not
simply an efficiency measure, it is actually a practical necessity.
If a crop protection product is registered in a trusted country, the data
provided to the overseas regulator should satisfy
requirements for it to be registered in New Zealand without reanalyzing
the overseas data. This would eliminate duplication, as
was said on the screen there, of what our trusted countries have already
done. Any additional assessment to manage New Zealand risks should
be limited to genuine, specific New Zealand issues.
Global harmonization of crop protection products should be the default approach by
ACVM and EPA, as is done with human medicines, where Medsafe
leverages international assessments.
And as such, in our submission, we recommend establishing a standalone
international pathway for this that is mandatory with limited
exclusions.
So our second point,
application of the precautionary approach.
HortNZ supports the precautionary approach and strong environmental
protections. Our concern is not with protection itself,
but with ensuring it is applied proportionately and consistently.
Scientific uncertainty is inherent in all risk assessments, and
regulatory decisions are rarely made with complete certainty.
But it is important to distinguish between hazard and actual practical risk, and
between theoretical exposure pathways and likely exposure under
real-world conditions. It is also important to consider benefits
when assessing risks. We are not seeking lower standards, rather
greater clarity and consistency around how precaution is applied.
We recommend a policy framework is created that outlines the best course of action
if there is uncertainty, and sets out how precaution is applied in
practice, including to give effect to the full purposes of the
act, specifically economic, social, and cultural well-being.
Currently, EPA implements a very strict precautionary approach, which
influences decision-making processes, and we are asking for an approach that is
proportionate to risk.
A third and final point we'd like to emphasize is that HortNZ does not
support introducing a levy. Throughout our submission, we identify
opportunities to improve efficiency using global data,
reduced duplication of assessments and reassessments.
This all means better use of regulatory resources.
Utilizing the assessment done by overseas regulators will reduce
duplication and significantly reduce the workload and resource required.
This opportunity should be implemented first.
A
new levy should be a measure of last resort rather than the starting point,
after all avenues for efficiencies have been explored.
A full list of our recommended amendments are in our submission, and overall, we do
not see these as radical changes. Rather, they are practical changes intended
to help ensure New Zealand growers have timely access to the same modern tools
available as their international competitors, while maintaining robust
science-based environmental protections.
We'd like to encourage the committee to use this opportunity to ensure the bill
delivers meaningful benefits to growers to enable double farm gate
value, for our vision for our sector to be realized.
Thank you.
Thanks.
We'll go to Steve for the first question.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you very much for your substantive submission.
I gleaned that your number one concern is about
greater ease of access to biopesticides.
Can you quickly outline for us why that's important for you?
Sure. Simon, would you like to?
Not just biopesticides, but a whole range of chemicals.
But in particular, biopesticides tend to be
safer for the environment because they are a more natural source.
So that's, yeah, one of the key reasons we are interested in that source.
You also, on page 15,
say that you'd like to see a single joint regulator.
But you comment that any such regulation should require ministerial
approval to amend, not agency discretion
alone. It should be accompanied by a mandatory public reporting
requirement on compliance. I wonder if you can expand on what you're getting at
there.
Sure.
So I guess, yeah, that was the desire in our submissions.
We see that the bills are being separate.
So,
we are okay with that. I guess it's the certainty and the regulations for the
timelines, so that as a product goes through, when it's submitted to both
regulators, there can be transparency so that chemical,
companies know, crop protection companies know, but also our growers know when
products may be released to market. So there's that transparency and timeline.
So that could be dealt with in the regulation.
Final one.
Regarding genetically modified organisms, are you anxious
that there needs to be greater ease of access to those or
faster pathways to
environmental use of those?
So we're awaiting further announcements from the government on the direction of
that path of the bill and
don't have further comment on that.
But that's not a high priority for you in terms of the HSNO Act?
We probably don't have further comment on that today because we didn't cover it in
our submission, so we-
Yeah, so it's not one I-- Like, if there was concern that there was
inadvertent greater leeway given to pathways to environmental release
of GMOs and the committee wanted to rein that in, that's not an issue that's
particularly of concern to you.
We agreed with the MFA and the minister's position on that question before,
that we're waiting for that bridge and we'll wait for that to come and have,
see the direction from the government on that one.
We felt this was quite separate issues for our-
Okay
... crop protection products.
It's good to understand. Thank you.
So you're just saying that because there's no pathway at the moment,
you haven't included it because it's not been
considered?
Correct. Yeah, we're waiting on that separate bill.
So we didn't put that in our submission.
I think the submission was good.
Yeah.
Any further questions?
Well, it's helpful to have your recommendations as they set them out-
Yes
... to understand it. So thank you.
Look, as Dana said, very
good submission and
certainly the areas that you've highlighted that you've got
concerns with,
we'll take into consideration as well. So thank you very much.
There don't seem to be any further questions.
Thank you.
All right.
Scheduled next are Physicians and Scientists for Global Responsibility New
Zealand
via Zoom. Are they-
Here.
Oh, good morning, Jodi.
Good morning. How are you?
Good, thanks. Welcome to the Primary Production Select Committee.
Mm.
We've set aside 10 minutes for your
submission.
Thank you. My n-
The time is in your hands. Away you go.
Thank you, Chair, and members. My name's Jodi Brunning.
I'm a member of the Physicians and Scientists for Global Responsibility New
Zealand. It's a 25-year-old charitable trust.
I have a BBus Agribusiness, Masters in Sociology.
My thesis was science policy, funding, and outcomes.
Now, the government has acknowledged that the risk assessment system is
outdated. Yet instead of updating risk assessment methods and
models first, it is legislating to make approvals easier, faster,
and less transparent. So in effect, members are being asked to
approve powers when the rules that underpin public trust and
confidence are not fit for purpose.
So the bill cannot be risk proportionate at this stage.
The regulatory impact statement problem definition concerns limited
access, lengthy, and uncertain approval pathways.
The RIS problem was not concerned with ensuring that the purpose and principles
of the HSNO Act would be upheld following any legislative
amendment. The members are not being asked to decide whether a
particular pathway is safe. Members are being asked to create pathways
before the underlying risk assessment evaluation has been
published, consulted on, and independently reviewed.
The HSNO Act amendment bill arose from the
recommendations made by the Ministry for Regulation,
Agricultural and Horticultural Products Regulatory Review, yet
that consultation was flawed. Back in 2024, the
Parliamentary Commissioner for the Environment commented that the regulatory
review consultation itself was too narrow.
Officials then invited expert stakeholders into the
HSNO Amendment Bill consultation who stood to
financially benefit from deregulation.
So this includes former AgCam, the Animal and Plant Health Association of New
Zealand that are funded by the agrochemical industry, and the Crown
Research Institutes that MBIE funds to create
biotechnology. So the people consulted were largely
organizations whose institutional mission is to obtain approvals,
develop and commercialise biotechnology, or accelerate product
access. Missing were doctors, public health
experts, occupational disease experts, environmental toxicologists,
consumer representatives, the organic sector, and the communities bearing the
risks.
A 2017 Treasury document, "Government Expectations for
Good Regulatory Practice," requires that affected and interested
parties should be granted appropriate opportunities to comment.
So two flawed consultations to date have failed to do
this. The May 2025 RIS fails to observe
the Treasury Government Expectations document in other ways.
Treasury requires that systematic impact and risk
analysis is undertaken, and that genuine effort
is made to identify, understand, and estimate the various
categories of cost and benefit. So there's no
cost-benefit analysis in the RIS, astonishing, and the
only cost-benefit language concerns levy funding for the regulated
industries. So the government has stated that the EPA risk
assessment framework is outdated.
Recommendation 10 of the Hort and Ag review
stated, "Update the EPA's outdated risk assessment models
and consider how to keep them up to date for the future." But
until risk assessment processes and models are revised,
incorporating the PCE's advice on
environmental monitoring, risks cannot be understood
and costs cannot be understood. So the
process is upside down. The bill is
premature. Fix risk assessment first, then
legislate. So the Amendment Bill contains mechanisms that
deregulate two streams, both toxic chemical regulations and
GMO gene editing pathways. But the bill reduces
public notification, it removes the methodology requirements for temporary
approvals, it creates new undefined concepts,
and expands reliance on overseas decisions, and
concentrates more authority within the EPA.
But we're seeing scientific scrutiny decrease.
So there's an accountability problem.
Two overseas jurisdictions cannot assure good
decision-making. For example,
FAO/WHO decisions are
conventionally less rigorous than European Food Safety Authority
decisions, which also require public feedback.
Then there is the issue of recent decisions versus older
decisions.
Transparency. Public oversight is substantially eroded.
The bill concentrates authority and expands executive
discretion at the same time that it contracts scientific oversight.
Then there's an evidentiary standards problem.
So the bill enables the EPA to denew a new
organism without appropriate safeguards and scrutiny.
Denewing is the process of prescribing an organism as not
new so that it will no longer be regulated by the HASNO Act.
The legal term appears to be invented.
The MB officials met with NZ EPA to
discuss gene technology regulation.
The EPA explained that they weren't able to regulate newer
gene-edited, or deregulate newer gene-edited organisms
due to the 2014 High Court case with the Sustainability
Council. The denewing concept is central to the bill.
Overriding that 2014 finding without risk evaluation
or cost analysis is extraordinary.
So officials and Crown law experts are inventing terminology,
expanding regulatory powers, and reducing transparency, but
without corresponding safeguards, regulatory frameworks, review mechanisms,
transparency requirements. So it seems that they might view
regulatory risk assessment as a secondary issue and any obligation
to protect human and environmental health as lower order
importance.
New Zealand ag exports are valued at 64 billion.
Select committee members know this, that New Zealand exporters position
themselves as quality suppliers to secure sales in
competitive markets. The 2017 Treasury document
demands cost-benefit evaluation is undertaken, but the
RIS did not evaluate the premium afforded by non-GMO status and
the broader trust status afforded by non-GMO messaging.
Consumer preference applies no matter where on the
GMO spectrum a modified or an edited
organism sits. So whether you're just making insertions or
deletions inside the gene or you're adding foreign DNA,
it's still a GMO.
In Ag Researchers Select Committee presentation to the Gene Tech
Bill, they acknowledged that their GM grass, the GM livestock
feed, could not be contained. So one of the first
releases could potentially undermine the capacity for meat
exports to be declared GMO-free.
And MPs, you are right to be concerned about resilience and
productivity, but resilience is not a single gene trait.
It emerges from complex interactions between genetics, soils, nutritions,
weather, ecosystems, pest management.
At the same time, these challenges are intensifying.
MB has reduced funding pathways for much of the public
good science that needs to address them.
So deregulation is not a substitute for
scientific capability.
PSGR NZ requests that the Primary Production Committee pause proceedings and
return the bill for fundamental revision following genuine
consultation extending well beyond the narrowly selected groups engaged to
date, and this includes comprehensive evaluation to understand the current
state of New Zealand risk assessment, but also the evaluation of
international regimes so that we do not fall into the trap of
deferring to inferior jurisdictions.
So it's a question of sequence. No responsible
regulatory system designs new approval pathways
before the models those pathways will rely upon have
been validated.
First, establish a modern, transparent, scientifically robust risk
assessment framework with best practice models.
Then decide, through robust risk evaluation and
cost-benefit analysis, what approvals that framework
can safely support. So on pages 19 to 30 of our submission,
PSR speak directly to the clauses that are the most
problematic. And so we leave you with this question, if the risk assessment
framework is outdated and unfit for purpose, why are we expanding
approval pathways before we know what needs to be fixed?
I thank you very much for this time.
Thank you.
I think Mark's got a question. Is that right?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you. I'm very grateful for your time.
Jodi, good morning. Thank you for your submission.
Evidently, I think you said that you have a sociology degree. Is that correct?
Yeah. So my post-graduate
studies involved looking at New Zealand science funding-
Yes
... and looking at the challenges scientists have, which is why I understand
how it is so difficult for people in the ag sector to get public good boots on the
ground funding-
Sure
... for basic monitoring, and so on.
Sure. So, how do you reconcile,
with your sociology hat on, that we have a practical issue in
terms of sanctioning for approval certain
methodologies here in New Zealand?
And do you agree,
yes or no, that we, in a practical sense, have difficulty,
and therein it stifles activity, economic
activity, productive activity,
and as you rightly point out, we're considered clean and green in New Zealand.
Leaving the GMO stuff aside for the moment, can you
reconcile and see that things are
inordinately difficult as it sits now for
primary industries to get stuff sanctioned for activity?
Investment is stifled, correct.
Research is stifled to actually understand complex systems.
So if you're looking at grass grub, if you're looking at the way we
could change, improve or work or research or monitor farming
for a challenge such as grass grub.
We're not allocating MB control science funding, they shouldn't.
That controls and takes everything over.
If you look at the problem in the hort industry and the challenges in the hort
industry, they are really complex.
It's to do with
the demands in overseas markets. But we're also competing, for
example, with Europe. So if you look at, for example, kiwi fruit in New Zealand,
kiwi fruit in Europe, what are the Italian recommendations and restrictions?
Do they have stricter recommendations?
Do they have the government that funding more pathways to
commence organic agriculture? So we talk about
getting on sort of the, we've got to have the strongest pesticides.
We've got dozens of pesticides on the New Zealand market that
are banned in Europe, and the Parliamentary Commissioner for the Environment
has talked about we don't do environmental monitoring.
We have no idea what the persistence is of the sprays in
horticultural regions and, for example, hort actually,
they have sort of tenfold the sprays of, for example,
dry stock. So there's a lot of chemicals we need to start saying, "Is this
the quality for the farmers?" Because we have occupational disease
for farmers such as Parkinson's, in
the hort sector. So we need to really understand that it's much
bigger than letting the
approvals flow, particularly because we have
not looked at the quality of that foreign
jurisdiction. So I really recommend we need to look very strongly at the
layers of how European Food Safety Authority, not just decides
around chemicals, but also-
Thanks, Jodi. I'm going to have to interrupt you. Way over time.
Thank you, Mark.
Thank you very much for your submission.
Thank you.
Right. We're going to move on. Have
Veg New Zealand, the Veg Council turned up?
Jay's here.
Oh, they are. Excellent.
So we're going to move on to
Vegetable Council.
Jay.
New Zealand Vegetable Council.
If you'll come forward. Thank you.
I was lucky, we were just seated outside, and we thought, "Oh, we'll go in."
Welcome to the Primary Production Select Committee.
We've set aside 15 minutes for your submission.
So the time is yours.
Superb. Look, first of all, thank you very much for taking the time to hear
us on this submission.
The vegetable sector is one of our more difficult
primary sectors to get our heads around because we've got so many crops involved.
So we just want to acknowledge the work by the committee and also officials.
The legislation's one part, but the culture and direction within
EPA and MPI is also very positive as well.
So legislation's one part, but general direction of officials,
we're also seeing a great change there, which is good.
I'll hand over to Jay. So Jay's here
to give the grower's perspective and
here to outline what's important to us.
Yeah. Good morning. Thank you for the opportunity to speak. My name's Jay Clarke.
I'm one of the owners and directors of Woodhaven Gardens, based in
the Hauraki, so just up the way here.
Short little drive in the rain in this morning.
We
crop on around about 1,000 hectares over 37 properties spread out
over the Hauraki. We're growing 24 fresh vegetable crops and
going around 10 to 15% of New Zealand's fresh cut vegetable supply.
We're very proud at Woodhaven that we use our wonderful natural
resources in terms of our
awa, our water, our whenua, our land, to grow healthy food that
predominantly stays here in New Zealand and feeds New Zealanders.
And I think it's really important that we understand the flow-on effects of this
legislation. So without safe and
effective means of controlling pest and disease, we literally cannot grow
the food that feeds this country.
That's right.
So, when we have regulatory barriers to get new chemistry in,
it leads to old chemistry being overused and resistant
profile building up in crops for disease and pests.
And that means that we lower our yields continuously.
Now- The skeptics amongst some of us might turn around
and say, "Well, the reason that growers would advocate for this is because we get
to make more money." The real effect of this is what it
does to food supply, right? So if we grow
a crop and we do not yield, we do not have food to feed people at
the end of the day. And the
flow on effect of that is that prices go up.
It becomes unaffordable for New Zealanders to access healthy food.
We want those controls to be safe, not just from a human food safety
perspective, but also from an environmental perspective.
So we obviously respect that there needs to be controls in place
to ensure that when we bring new solutions in, whether those are
bio solutions, whether those are synthetic or chemical-based
solutions, that they are both safe and effective
for human beings and for the environment.
But we need a process that actually delivers those in a timely manner and delivers
new solutions to growers in order to be able to
maintain or even expand yield. Now, I think one of the things that's
overlooked in this process a lot is
that actually by having effective control measures for pest and
disease, we're actually able to lower the overall environmental
effect of food production.
And I'll explain why. If we need 100
cabbages to feed the country and I only get a 50% yield,
I have to grow 200 cabbages, and I have to put on the nitrate
fertilizer for 200 cabbages. I have to apply the water for 200 cabbages.
I have to cultivate land for 200 cabbages.
And our biggest effect, environmental effect of vegetable growing is sediment loss
and it's nutrient loss. Now, if I've got really effective control
mechanisms for pest and disease, and it means that I only have to grow
110 cabbages to get my 100 cabbages to feed the country, I'm
actually going to dramatically lower my overall environmental effect.
So that's why these policies are really important, not just from an
economic perspective in terms of exports, not just in terms of a food
security perspective for our country, but also
mental perspective, because the more we can get effective
control of pest and disease, the higher our yield is, the less
crop we actually need in the ground to effectively feed everybody.
So this is a massive win-win piece of legislation if we get
this right, and there is fantastic advancements in this
space around new chemistry, around new bio
controls that will allow us to get better yields in this country and deliver
better outcomes for growers and all New Zealanders and the environment.
Excellent.
Thank you. So we'll go to Steve.
Yeah, brilliant. Thank you very much, and very much appreciate the work you guys
do.
You're still well worth the visit, Steve.
Yeah, I'm very keen. I'd love to. I've been down in the Hawkes Bay with
some of the veg growers down there,
looking to keep their processing capability.
Yes, very important.
You're not primarily concerned about access to new
vegetable varieties or novel varieties of
vegetables?
Yes, we are.
You are?
Because those varieties also come with different
profiles for self-protection from disease and from
pests.
Right.
One of the thing that's really interesting is when we look at the whole genetic
editing space,
and again, I'll take an example where in the States they have a
genetically edited pawpaw that doesn't get
bacterial ring spot.
Brassica production in New Zealand is probably the biggest impact
over winter for loss of production is bacterial ring spot.
And I sat with our friends at Plant and Food and said-
Mm
... "How easy would it be for you to take what they've done on that pawpaw and put
it into a cabbage or a broccoli?" And they were like, "Click your fingers." I said,
"How much would that cost?"
A million bucks. The return
It's big
... is huge because-
So you-
.. because then you're not using all that nitrate fertilizer, you're not
cultivating that land to get that crop.
So you do want, you would like to see easing in pathways for use
of gene edited, genetically modified organisms, and do you see this bill as
assisting with that?
Look, I don't know if it goes all the way that we
need it to, and nor do I want to expouse that we should go all the way.
What I think we should is cautiously and optimistically investigate
the possibilities of using new technology to drive better
yields, to lower cost of healthy food,
and lower the overall environmental impact of food production.
And then my final one is,
what are your concerns about the extent of public willingness to consume
products that
have been gene edited or modified?
Yeah, that is high. At the end of the day, we have to meet the
public demand for the food that they want.
Yeah.
And if the public support is not there
for those products, then as an
industry, we need to step back and look at how we can educate them on the safety
profile of that. Either remove those concerns, or we have to
listen and meet the market. At the end of the day, if I grow 100 cabbages that no
one wants to eat, I'm not going to be a vegetable grower for very long.
So,
it is definitely a relevant factor, but education plays a role in
that. If we do, through our explorations,
decide that this is the best way to go forward, that it delivers the right
safety and benefit profiles for the country, then education of the public would be
an important role to play.
Mark.
Good morning. Good morning, gentlemen.
Very quickly, what tonnage per hectare would
you think to see as an increase
with this kind of pathway being sanctioned?
And time to yield,
would it be affected as well in so much as-
You've got not only an increase in production, I assume, by tonnage,
but also, when you're thinking of crops, there is a time to
yield and harvest.
Yes.
Would this be increased
with this
process being sanctioned?
Look,
either we can develop softer interventions
that don't interrupt the
target crop as much-
Mm
... we will get a quicker time to yield.
If you're looking at any pest or disease control
option, it will also affect the target crop that you're applying it to.
So if we have softer interventions,
we will get a faster time to yield. In terms of
exact measures of increase in tonnages, I cannot tell
you. It will depend on the intervention.
But if you take my example around bacterial ring spot, now whether we have
an effective chemical control, a bio control, or
we have a variety that has been genetically edited to not get it,
we maybe lose 20% of our crop to bacterial ring spot at times.
That's 20% less cabbages I don't have to put in the ground, 20%
land I don't have to cultivate, 20% less fertilizer I don't have to use,
20% less water I don't have to use. So the
benefit to us in terms of being able to produce a more affordable
crop,
with a lower overall environmental impact, is huge.
Mm.
And technology is moving extremely fast in
all forms of crop protection, whether it's new varieties, whether it's new
chemistry, or whether it's bio controls.
And if New Zealand doesn't have a system to allow its growers to access those,
we're going to be sitting in the dark ages, and the effect-
Bit behind
... the effect is overall higher cost of food for our population,
and the flow on health effects that come from people going to the
supermarket and having to buy brown, yellow, and white food instead of
buying healthy, fresh food, because it's too
expensive.
Very succinct. Thank you so much.
So,
fungicides have made a big difference in cereal yields, for example,
over the last 15, 20 years. Are there any
chemistry that's being used overseas that we aren't using here that
would, A, give better protection from
whether it's a weed or pest or
fungus,
and B,
softer chemistry and would do the job not as
harshly as some of the existing chemistry that's available?
The answer to that question is undeniably yes, and I won't sit here and list
all of them.
Mm.
But at the moment, the big issue is New Zealand's a tiny market.
Fresh vegetable production in New Zealand accounts for about 0.1%
of New Zealand's agricultural land use.
So not 1%,
0.1%.
Zero.
Right.
We're tiny, right? So when you
put a commercial proposition to an agricultural chemical company that says they
need to spend millions of dollars getting a product registered, and
they
simply have a tiny market, they are never going to make that money back.
So products just don't get registered.
The other problem that we have as growers is the rules around
minimum residue levels. So you might get a product
registered for broccoli because it's a reasonable large crop, but it won't
get registered, say, for cauliflower or cabbage or Asian veg or other
brassica crops, which mean growers then need to ensure we've got
basically no residue present, even though
we have an established safety guideline on brassicas.
Which means our ability to control pests and disease
right up until harvest for that crop becomes really,
really difficult, and we run the risk of losing our gap license over
something that-
Mm
... is actually completely safe for human consumption.
It's just that that product hasn't been registered over the other crops.
So, the expense and cost of product
registration is a real barrier to growers having the tools that they need,
getting the latest technology that's coming available worldwide
because we don't develop these things really internally in New Zealand,
and therefore being able to deliver the best outcomes for New Zealand as a country
in terms of food supply. And I speak from the vegetable
sense in terms of domestic supply, because 80 to 90% of
what vegetable growers do stays here in New Zealand and feeds Kiwis.
We are different from the rest of the horticultural sector in that regard.
Thanks for that. Now, Suz has a sup.
Oh, great to see you here, Jay.
Good to see you, Suz.
Thank you very much. And also,
thank you for so clearly articulating that-
Mm
... lowering the cost of vegetables and also the environmental impact.
Yeah.
I think that's great. It was really good.
So you talked about it
being registered for one crop and not another.
Yes.
So are you saying essentially if you grow that range of brassicas-
Yes
... just to clarify, that it's registered for broccoli, but not
for Asian greens?
Correct.
So you cannot apply it to the Asian greens, even though you've got them planted in
the paddock next door?
So you can apply it-
Okay
... but you come under a different minimum residue level requirement.
So we might have a safety profile for human consumption that's a certain part per
million, and you've basically got to come down to zero.
So what it means is we have to stop applying that quite a
long time, sometimes maybe 28, 30 days before we can
sell it, which then opens that crop back up to loss of yield through
that pest or disease
coming back into the crop.
And completely,
it's just... What's the word I'm
looking for? It's just a process, right?
There's no
safety data that would indicate that it would ever be unsafe in-
No runway
... Shanghai if it's completely safe in a broccoli.
So it's a bit illogical and a bit of a fictional nonsense, so
to speak.
Mm.
So,
making it easier and more cost effective for ag chem companies to
register canned product
is a really important step for growers as well.
So, a good example-
Thank you
... Movento. So Movento's a key tool for IPM programs
in Australia for crops. And so it's registered in New Zealand for potatoes, but
not for other crops, so it makes it really hard to utilize on the crops here.
But it's the mainstay in Australia for actually integrated pest
management program, and they've got it registered for 20 or 30 different crops.
But we've got it for one or two here.
One.
Yeah.
Yeah. Okay. Thank you.
Thanks very much. We've come to time.
Appreciate you taking the time to come and present to us.
So thank you very much.
Thank you for the opportunity to be here. See you all.
Very good. Thank you.
Yeah.
Right. We'll move on. We are now going to
hear from Seed and Grain New Zealand.
I think they're going to be online.
Where is he?
He's not very well advertised.
You should go and see him. He runs-- It's an awesome operation.
I know. I've been trying for it.
Yes. Literally, they-
Good morning
... the best veggies in New Zealand.
Welcome to the Primary Production Select Committee.
We have
allocated 15 minutes for your presentation with questions.
So,
the time is yours.
Oh, you're on mute, Sarah.
Thank you.
Kia ora koutou. I'm Sarah Clark, the Chief Executive of Seed and
Grain New Zealand.
And Cressida Patrick was planning to
join me. I can't see-
She is on. She's on.
Oh, she's there? Okay.
Yep.
So Cressida's our Biosecurity and Technical Manager.
I'm going to just introduce our context, and then Cressida will
talk to our technical points.
But firstly, thank you for the opportunity to make this oral submission.
So, we represent an industry that relies on agrichemicals
to produce seeds and grains important to New Zealand's
economy.
Our members produce wheat, barley, oats, and other
grains that are used for human and
animal consumption.
And our members also produce seeds for sowing that are sold here in New
Zealand and internationally. And this includes grasses,
clover, forage species, oil seeds, and
vegetable seeds, including 40 to 50% of the
world's carrot seed and 60% of the
world's radish seed and clover seed.
And a major market for us is the EU.
So, most seeds for sowing are treated with a light
coating of agrichemical before they are sown and before
they're sold, too. So our industry
relies on those agrichemicals because they protect the seeds
for sowing in the soil, and also the young shoots and roots in the
soil from disease and pests. And that's really
important, because it enables the crop to get a healthy start.
So chemicals also protect the growing crop from
weeds, pests, and diseases all the way through to seed set.
So seed crops
require a much longer time in the ground than other crops, because we're taking
them all the way through to seed.
So at harvest time, arable farmers can reap a high-quality,
pure seed or grain crop, and our members, the seed companies,
have good yields of high-quality seed that
they can sell profitably.
So we were compelled to make a submission on the HSNO Amendment Bill
because of the importance of agrichemicals to our
industry, and because our country right now has a rare opportunity to
improve the access and approval of chemicals.
The regulatory settings will be impactful to our industry in two
ways. So firstly, the regulations have a direct
impact on the sustainability and productiveness of arable
farms and seed companies. Why does that matter?
Well, aside from the inherent value in having a sustainable and
thriving seed and grain industry, there is a
codependency between arable production
and dairy and livestock farming in New Zealand.
So any negative or positive regulatory impact on arable
farms and seed companies
has a long chain of impact, because they
produce the seed and feed that underpins New Zealand's dairy
farms and sheep and beef farms, which in turn underpins wealth
generation in New Zealand as a country through the dairy
and meat products for export.
Secondly, the regulations will impact New Zealand's ability to
supply seeds to international markets such as the EU.
So the issue here is that the EU is prohibiting
agrichemicals faster than we can approve the chemistries that
they do allow, which means as the EU phases out our
chemistry, we won't be able to supply seeds treated
with their approved chemicals, and we will be unable
to use newer chemistries unless
our approval processes keep pace here.
So, that's a bit of a summation of why these
reforms and these changes are really critical to our industry.
We do strongly support the intent of the HSNO
Amendment Bill. However, Seed and Grain New Zealand
considers that the bill
doesn't go far enough in addressing long-standing issues with the
HSNO Act. And I'm going to pass across to Cressida Patrick, my
colleague, who will complete our oral submission on
the technical matters. Thank you.
Kia ora all. So Seed and Grain New Zealand supports the bill's efforts to
streamline regulatory pathways, improve certainty for
applicants, increase alignment with trusted international regulators,
to modernize assessment processes, and also to reduce
unnecessary duplication and administrative burden.
But as Sarah has indicated, we don't believe that the current amendments
have gone far enough to fully achieve these objectives.
So our oral submission will focus on four key points.
First, it's critical that treated seed importers and seed treatment
applicators are excluded from the proposed hazardous substance levy.
The EPA have had a recent policy shift to classify treated seed
as a hazardous substance, which creates a risk that seed
importer and seed treatment applicators could become liable
under the proposed hazardous substance levy.
Regulating seed as a hazardous substance is very much an unusual
international position. Globally, seed is
considered seed regardless of what's being applied to
it. We've worked with the International Seed Federation and other national
seed associations to explain to the EPA why
treated seed should remain treated-- defined as seed,
with an applied plant protection product under it.
If we were to be
captured under the hazardous substance levy, this would impose significant
compliance cost on our industry that's historically operated
outside the hazardous substance approval framework.
We believe it's an unintended consequence of the EPA's proposed group
standard for treated seed, and unfortunately it's been timed at the
same time that the bill amendments have gone through.
So therefore, we're having to explicitly recommend that treated seed is
exempt from the hazardous substance levy provisions.
Secondly,
we are a government industry agreement
member under the GIA agreement. Our
representative is the Seed and Grain Readiness and Response.
We're an incorporated body that I've explained in our submission.
So I just want to reiterate, we support the proposed change in Part 5 for the term
emergency to go to adverse events, as many
biosecurity incursions do not initially present as emergencies but still
require early action to prevent establishment and spread.
So for example,
our industry's recently had to respond to fall armyworm, which blew in from
Australia in 2022.
This was under active response for around 14 months before moving to long-term
management, yet we still have one on-label control
option. This international-- It's internationally renowned
moth that can develop resistance very easily, is
now established in New Zealand and is under long-term management.
We believe that if we'd had access to more chemistry early on, we might have had
greater success in stopping the prevent-- um, preventing the
establishment and spread of fall armyworm.
So we look forward to greater clarity on how foreseeable is interpreted and the
timeframe for urgent approvals, and the involvement of industry partners in
this decision-making process.
Thirdly,
we support the international regulatory reliance and greater use of the rapid
assessment pathway. As previous speakers have probably
already indicated, New Zealand is a small market, and we have limited
regulatory resource.
We don't believe we should be duplicating assessments that have been already
conducted by trusted international regulators unless there's a New
Zealand-specific risk.
To improve access to innovative seed treatment technologies,
SGNZ supports greater reliance on assessments undertaken by these trusted
international regulators.
We believe where seed treatments have already been approved for on-label use
following robust regulatory review, treated seed with
those products should be able to enter New Zealand with limited or no
further assessment, unless there's a clearly identified New
Zealand-specific risk that warrants additional scrutiny.
We've had several multinational members inform us they're developing seed treatment
products overseas that have lower environmental and
human health,
um, profiles that will not be eligible for entry into New
Zealand
just because of the concerns with the current framework.
We'd like to see the EPA focus on New Zealand-specific risks rather than
duplicating robust assessments that have already been done
offshore.
Fourthly, New Zealand needs dedicated regulatory pathways for
biopesticides and other lower-risk compounds.
These products are becoming increasingly important for sustainable
agricultural use and in IPM's, Integrated Pest
Management systems.
These also help reduce the reliance on the older broad-spectrum
chemistries that are at domestic and international
regulatory risk of review.
There are approximately 39 active ingredients on label for use as seed
treatments in New Zealand. Of these, 17 are on the EU's
indicative list of chemicals being restricted.
This means that 44% of seed treatment options available in New
Zealand may not be eligible for use for one of our main export
markets.
The current has no framework that treats biopesticides and other lower-risk
compounds in the same way as the synthetic conventional
agrichemicals,
and they must undergo the same assessment process, which we
believe creates unnecessary costs
for the approval of these products.
We support inclusion and the inclusion of enabling provisions that
allow the development of risk-proportionate regulatory pathways.
For this one, we're going to suggest a group standard for
biopesticides and biostimulants and other lower-risk compounds.
In conclusion,
we support the overall direction of the bill and champion the overall direction
of the bill. However, we ask the industry feedback and practical
solutions that have been put forward in our recommendations are fully
considered and reflected in another drafting of the bill
We want to ensure the bill maximizes the opportunity put in
place, as we believe this is needed to ensure an
enduring fit for purpose legislation that supports innovation,
backs our primary sector, and helps New Zealand grow.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you.
We're open for questions.
Right, questions.
Steve.
If we've got time.
Yep. We've got a couple of minutes.
Yeah. Thank you again for your substantive submission. Thank you very much.
You've really heavily focused on,
pesticides and
treatments for-
Diseases
... diseases and seeds and so forth.
You are not concerned about
new organisms,
in terms of generally modified organisms,
as a thing that you want greater access to or want to see faster pathways for?
So we're currently,
as indicated in our submission, the EU is one of our key markets,
and it's very recently that they've changed their position
on genetically modified organisms and
gene edits under their
new genetic technologies. So we're still discussing
that as a membership.
So I'm hesitant to take a
definitive stance, but I will pass to Sarah if she has any further
comments.
Yeah, that's right. We
certainly, as an industry,
are discussing
actually the pending
revision of the Gene Technology Bill,
but for this has no
amendment. At least we have been primarily focused on the chemical
access.
Yeah.
So
how important is your current non-GMO production status in terms of
where you send your seeds? For example,
just more broadly.
Yeah. So, in Asian markets and
EU markets, the GMO-free status has been an
important
declaration on our exports.
With the advent of gene editing and the changes in the
EU, and actually in other Asian countries, we are seeing a shift
in sentiment from customers in those
markets. And so that actually starts to open
up opportunities for New Zealand to
still be able to provide GMO-free
declarations,
because many countries now are saying that gene
edited products are not GMO.
I think that-
But just my final question would be... Oh, are you going to follow up?
I was just going to say, a position that we have been hearing and that has been
championed amongst our membership is their right to choose how they
operate.
Mm.
And so we just need to have in place systems that ensure that they have the
ability to either grow conventionally,
grow GM, or grow organic, and we need to
ensure that we have the systems in place to support all of those different
options.
Yeah. So that sort of goes to my next question.
You wouldn't want a regime that forfeited,
inadvertently, the right of people to produce without GM,
and your current status, which is that there's a preferred or
a preference on GMO production,
though you indicate that might be changing, but you'd want to be sure that there
are precautions in place to ensure that wasn't forfeited
inadvertently.
Yeah. That's right. We would want ability to
be able to
trace any GMO
crops versus non-GMO crops, and the industry
does have
isolation and
tracking systems in place. There would be some tweaking
needed. But I think the key thing is that gene editing
is no longer being considered GMO in-
That's right
... many countries now.
Thank you. Look, we've come to time.
That's all I wanted to say.
We've come to time.
Yeah.
So, I appreciate you taking the time to present
to us, and thank you
for your
time this morning.
Thank you.
Right, we're going to move on to
Animal and Plant Health Association.
They're here.
Can I just ask, we had a scheduled break at one stage for five minutes.
Yeah, we're shooting through.
I know that, but we know we're going to have it.
Is there only a five-minute break in the whole day?
Is that what-
Yeah. Well,
I'll try and get a bigger break later on at about some
time around 10-ish.
Okay.
There you go.
Yeah. Well, we've got someone at-
Well, around there.
We'll just...
Well, good morning. Thank you for coming in to present.
We've allocated 15 minutes,
so away you go.
Right. Good morning. Thank you for the opportunity to speak with you today.
My name is Emma Waller. I'm a board member of Animal and Plant Health
Association New Zealand, or APHANZ.
And with me today is Tania Kast, the technical advisor at
APHANZ.
APHANZ is the peak independent body representing companies who
research, develop, manufacture, sell, and distribute
animal health and crop protection products that underpin New Zealand's
primary sector Our members support farmers, growers, and
veterinarians, and collectively contribute more than $24 billion to New
Zealand's primary economy.
Our members are applicants in this regulatory system, and the HASNO Amendment
Bill directly affects their ability to bring safe, innovative, and
effective products to New Zealand.
But this bill is not just important for AFANZ members.
It's also important for the entire primary sector and the shared outcomes that we
all rely on, which are productivity, sustainability,
resilience, and global competitiveness.
This bill matters because New Zealand's primary sector depends on timely
access to innovative tools to manage pests, diseases, weeds, and
environmental pressures.
When the regulatory system is slow, unpredictable, or repetitive,
the consequences are felt on the ground and lost productivity,
increased cost, and reduced ability to respond to emerging threats.
Because the HASNO and ACVM Acts form the basis of an integrated
two regulator system, many issues arise at the intersection
of these two acts.
We encourage you to consider the
HASNO and ACVM Amendment Bill submissions
together. The HASNO Amendment Bill is a positive first
step towards modernising the regulatory system, but targeted changes
to the bill and robust supporting regulations are essential to
ensure they deliver the proportionate, transparent, and efficient
approval pathway that Cabinet intended and industry desperately
needs.
We acknowledge the work that has gone into the draft bill, but the details really
matter. Without critical strengthening of key provisions, the
system risks remaining slow, complex, and difficult to navigate.
AFANZ members back Cabinet's roadmap to improve the regulatory
system.
They operate globally and know what a modern, high-performing
regulatory system looks like.
The changes proposed in our submission are practical, workable, and
grounded in transparency, accountability, and proportionality.
Today, I'll focus on the critical priority changes, the ones with the greatest
impact on investment decisions, manufacturing and supply
chains, and the ability to bring novel products to New Zealand.
Timeframes are ranked as a high priority for our members across the HASNO and
ACVM Amendment Bills. Strengthening both bills in this area is
essential for transparency, oversight, and accountability.
Under the current system, timeframes are very inconsistent and
very unpredictable. The bill as drafted does not yet
provide the clarity required. Our submission
calls for explicit, transparent statutory timeframes for
completeness checks, rapid assessments, and final decisions.
Predictable timeframes are essential for long-term investment planning
and directly influence how quickly farmers, growers, and veterinarians
can access the tools they need.
The proposed time limit variation, allowing the EPA to
vary timeframes without justification, risks failure to improve the
system and undermines certainty and trust.
We're calling for you to think critically about the impact that this may have on
our farmers, growers, and vets, and reject such proposals.
The rapid assessment pathway was designed to improve efficiency by
enabling proportionate risk-based decisions.
In practice, this has been underused due to narrow interpretation
and unclear drafting.
This pathway is essential to
deliver faster access to safe, proven technologies already
approved by trusted overseas regulators.
The amendments in this bill do not resolve this and may reduce the pathway's
usefulness while increasing administrative burden.
Our submission calls for clear drafting requiring the EPA to use the
rapid pathway where criteria are met.
A clear definition of the significant adverse effects test, as
recommended by the Ministry for the Environment and the regulatory impact analysis.
Assurance that the pathway cannot be avoided through overly cautious
interpretation.
These changes would free up regulatory capacity to focus on generally
high-risk applications.
AFANZ members support sustainable, predictable resourcing for the EPA,
but the levy framework as drafted does not meet established public sector
cost recovery principles.
Our members' concerns include no clear
statutory process for the levy,
no requirement for cost benefit analysis or publication of cost
recovery models, no memorandum account to track
over or under recovery, and no statutory reporting on levy
performance.
Without these safeguards, levy payers cannot assess whether changes reflect
actual regulatory costs, and the framework risks becoming a
revenue-raising mechanism rather than a fair, transparent cost recovery
tool.
We are asking for amendments to ensure that the levy is fair, efficient,
transparent, and aligned with best practice.
In addition to these critical changes, our submission identifies high-priority
amendments relating to transfer of powers, data
protection, group standards, and the use of the precautionary approach.
We also highlight other priority areas for consideration,
including the proposed temporary approval pathway and the long-term
question of a one-regulator model.
All proposed changes are set out in detail in part four of our submission.
Our members operate globally, and we know what a modern, high-performing
regulatory system looks like. The changes we are proposing are grounded in
transparency, accountability, and proportionality.
A strengthened bill will support innovation, reduce unnecessary
duplication, improve predictability, and
enable faster access to essential tools, and ultimately deliver
better outcomes for the entire primary sector.
This is not about lowering standards.
It's about smart regulation that protects people and the environment while
enabling New Zealand to thrive.
Finally, I want to emphasize the importance of meaningful engagement as
regulations are developed.
AFANZ is a key stakeholder in this system.
Our members use it every day. We ask that the committee note our
expectation for early exposure to drafts and genuine co-design
with industry. This is essential to ensuring regulations are workable
on the ground.
Part five of our submission highlights some areas identified during the analysis of
the HSNO Amendment Bill for setting and regulation.
This is high level, flagged for further analysis, and not a comprehensive
list of what may be required.
Our members stand ready to work constructively with government to deliver a
regulatory system that is proportionate, transparent, efficient,
and certain, one that supports innovation and strengthens New Zealand's
primary sector.
This is an opportunity to regularize, sorry, modernize the regulatory system
and support innovation across the primary sector.
What we lock in now will shape New Zealand's ability to access
world-leading technologies.
Without change, for many of our members, the question is no longer, "Do we
register in New Zealand?" but, "Do we supply in New Zealand at all?"
Thank you for the opportunity to present today, and I'm happy to take any
questions.
So, I've got one from Dana and then Mark.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you for your submission, which is great, and thank you for the
recommendations both in the primary and secondary legislation.
It's really good. I'm interested in your comments around the time
frames and understanding,
firstly, two things. How long is it taking at the moment
to get things through a process, and also,
what do you think is the cost of that
to the country but also to productivity?
The answer to the first question is it's currently taking five or more years to get
a new molecule through the regulatory system, which is
mind-blowing. It's much longer than
we're seeing in similar countries such as Australia.
In Australia, it's less than two years,
so that difference is huge. In terms of cost, I don't have
that exact figure on me.
Tania, are you across that or?
We're not across costs. In terms of time frames, a
thing to emphasize as well, not only how long it takes, but the uncertainty
with applications sitting in a pre-application phase or that backlog, as you
might have heard.
Mm.
Just really unsure of how that's going to progress and when it's going to be
picked up. So, it's really the uncertainty and time frames
that's quite critical.
So-
And would it be fair to assume, and we know what assumptions are, but would it be
fair to assume that we are losing
a competitive edge as a result of the
delays in actually getting this, an investment in our
country and in our production sector?
From feedback from our members, that does seem that's the case.
Thank you.
Mark.
Yeah. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and welcome, ladies.
Thank you so much for being with us today.
I think it's more a supplementary probably on Dana Kukucka's
question around predictable time frames.
Do you want to give us examples of that?
And incidentally, speak to the detractors because there will be detractors
saying, "Oh, well, you're just trying to circumvent
environmental protections." How do you
square that
attitude that will certainly be held by some in society
up? And do you think when you use your language around
predictable time frames,
what they actually are, and to Dana's question,
how does it give the industry surety, and where is the production
benefits and losses?
Thanks.
So, to start with predictability,
having predictable time frames is really important to be able to ensure that we
have
supply chain readiness to be able to meet the market.
Not knowing when a product will be approved makes it impossible to predict when
to start purchasing raw materials,
gearing up for launch, getting your marketing materials in place.
So, that puts companies on a back foot immediately in not having
that certainty.
The second part of the question with regards
to speeding things up and potentially
jeopardizing environmental safety, that's not what we're proposing at
all. We want to have a regulatory system
that is effective, that is thoroughly assessing the
risk, but it needs to be proportionate, and where
there's opportunities to utilize assessments that have been done
overseas,
we should be taking those opportunities.
Where there are unique New Zealand risks, they should certainly be
assessed for New Zealand, but there are ways that we can do this better
and more simply.
Succinct answer. Thank you so much.
Thanks very much.
Right. We've come to the end of questions, it would seem.
So, thank you very much for your time.
Thank you.
Thank you so much.
Appreciate it.
Now,
Deer NZ are here.
On the electron.
Carol, how are you?
Good. Good morning.
Just here. I walk here this morning.
Thanks for taking the time this morning to present to us.
You have 10 minutes, so the time is yours.
Thank you.
Chair and members of the committee, tena koutou katoa.
My name is Carol Bunau, and I'm here on behalf of Deer
NZ to talk to our submission on the HSNO Amendment Bill
Dairy NZ is an industry good organisation representing around
11,000 New Zealand dairy farmers.
Our role is to support sustainable, profitable, and resilient
dairy, the dairy sector, one that contributes significantly to the
New Zealand economy, supports rural communities, and underpins
a large share of our export earnings.
So why does this matter to dairy farmers?
At its core, the bill matters because it influences how
quickly and how reliably farmers can have access to the
tools they need to do their job well.
These tools include products that support animal health and
welfare, manage pest and diseases, improve
environmental outcomes, and enable innovation,
including greenhouse gas mitigation.
When the system works well, farmers can respond quickly to emerging
risks and opportunities. But when it doesn't, delays
and uncertainty can have a real consequence on farm
resilience, animal welfare, biosecurity
preparedness, and in some case, public health and emissions
outcomes.
Dairy NZ supports the intent of the bill, particularly a
focus on improving efficiency, clarity, and
proportionality, while maintaining appropriate safeguards
for people, the environment, and our market access.
I'll briefly summarize the points that we've got in our submission.
Making the system workable in practice.
We welcome the reforms that make the HSNO system more practical and
responsive.
Right now, the regulatory pathways can restrict research
into emerging solutions, including greenhouse gas mitigations,
and timely access to tools that are needed to manage new or
developing biosecurity and animal health risks.
A more risk-proportionate and flexible system is essential,
particularly for lower risk research and time-sensitive
applications.
Recognizing overseas assessments.
We strongly support enabling greater reliance on
assessments from credible international regulators.
When a product has already been
robustly assessed overseas, the information
should help inform a more efficient New Zealand process while
allowing for local conditions and risks.
For farmers, this is fundamentally around timely access, especially
for products that support animal health, pest and disease
management, and niche or emerging needs.
Delays in access can compound risks and reduce system
responsiveness.
We also support improving efficiency and certainty.
We support the changes that reduced unnecessary cost,
delay, and uncertainty.
New Zealand is a small market.
If approval processes are too complex or too
unpredictable, it can discourage investment and reduce the
availability of innovative or niche products.
Clearer pathways, particularly around the use of technical information and
external expertise, will support more consistent,
timely decision-making and improve confidence for
applicants, as you just heard.
In terms of strengthening
levy transparency and governance, Dairy NZ and our
levy payers are very familiar with paying multiple levies.
We would raise concerns about the proposed levy arrangements that are
currently in the bill
and encourage consideration of a very clear
statutory purpose for the levies,
transparent mechanisms such as memorandum accounting, and
defined review and reporting requirements.
These are important governance
safeguards for managing levies.
We recommend introducing a statutory purpose clause to
ensure levy revenue is used appropriately.
We encourage greater transparency through reporting and memorandum
accounting, and also a regular,
predictable levies review. Together, these would
strengthen accountability, fairness, and confidence for
HSNO applicants that would ultimately benefit our levy
payers.
Also ensuring that the reforms deliver in practice.
Finally, we emphasize that much of the impact of this bill will depend
on how it's implemented.
The detail of the regulations, notices, and operational settings
all determined whether the system will truly deliver
on timely, proportionate, and workable pathways.
We encourage ongoing engagement with the sector as those
details are developed.
So in conclusion, Dairy NZ
supports the intent of the reforms, but from a farmer perspective,
success will ultimately be measured by whether the system enables
timely access to safe and effective tools,
supports innovation and resilience, and also
remains practical and proportionate in real-world settings.
It's about ensuring that New Zealand dairy farmers aren't left behind,
particularly when responding to emerging risks, new technologies,
and changing environmental expectations.
If we get it right, we will have a regulatory system that not only protects
but also enables a productive, sustainable, and
resilient agricultural sector.
Thank you for the opportunity to present, and I'm happy to take questions.
Thank you, Carol.
Yeah.
Do we have any questions for Steve?
Sure, I can ask a question.
This is the Hazardous Substances and New Organisms Act.
Yes.
You're not particularly anxious about greater pathways in the new
organism space, more
concerned that
in the hazardous substances space there's greater ease of
processes. Do I interpret that correctly?
I'm not sure. What do you mean by ease of process?
Well, in terms of the regulatory framework and access to--
We've heard mostly from growers today-
Mm-hmm
... who are concerned about access to the likes of biopesticides and things.
What are your primary concerns with
the pathways that are a problem for you as Dairy NZ?
Certainly, we see biochemicals, in our language-
Mm
... as being an opportunity to manage risks
in the environment.
Mm-hmm.
We see that that certainly provides quite a positive,
progressive and innovative way forward,
compared to the traditional chemical focus that we've
had in the past.
Mm-hmm.
We recognize that in order to explore the opportunities there, and
also the risks-
Mm
... that we need a framework that allows us to do that in quite a safe environment.
And we think that the bill should go some way to starting that
journey-
Mm
... in terms of how do you actually develop and
recognize and consider what we could do into the future around the
biochemical space.
Thank you. Mark.
Good morning. Do you want to give us some specific
historical reference, if you can, about perhaps
where
the lethargy, the sort of glacial movement of sanctioning
has affected productivity in New Zealand?
I can think of the armyworm as perhaps being one of those.
Have you got anything else in mind?
We've got examples of fall armyworm, absolutely, in terms of the
tools that we needed to manage that.
We've got Chilean needle grass. Our focus certainly
for dairy farmers is more about cattle, and a
recognition of what tools do we have in the
toolbox to manage any diseases that come out that we
need to manage fast.
The HPAI recent emergence is a good
example of making sure that we've got the right settings in terms of
vaccines
or whatever is needed to manage that.
So it's being nimble and innovative as
these new risks emerge. Dairy NZ does a lot of work around
risk assessment to try and assess what are the top
likely pest and diseases risks that would be managed.
And we'd like to see a system that allows us to then look,
sometimes globally, at what are the opportunities that are out there that we can
apply to the New Zealand market, New Zealand dairy farming
systems.
Very good answer. Thank you so much.
Thanks very much.
We've come to time, so I appreciate you coming in this
morning. Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Now, is anyone from Fertiliser New Zealand-- Yes, we have.
Vera?
Vera Petisch.
Yes, you are welcome. You have 10
minutes. Thank you. Submission has been read.
Away you go.
Thank you. So the association represents some of the major fertiliser suppliers
in New Zealand.
I'm not going to repeat the contents of my submission because you've been through
it all, but I just thought I'd focus on the levy, because
that's obviously quite a substantial change
coming ahead.
And there are
kind of, I think there's kind of clear issues.
There's one purpose and scope, what it's covering,
that it's any monies come in are ring-fenced.
Dairy NZ talked about a memorandum account.
Regular reporting, so we know how
the money derived from the levy is being used, and regular review
whether it's meeting its intent. So that's the simple bit.
But HSNO is a complex space, as you fully appreciate.
So 30,000 chemicals, 150,000
products, it covers everything.
Fuel, paint,
fertiliser, agrichemicals,
the Handy Andy you use at the weekend.
It's a very broad space and covers.
And reading the bill, I first thought, "Oh my goodness, they're about to produce a
levy on fuel and fertiliser. That's pretty brave."
Because it's not clear what the intent is.
As worded, it's everything under
HSNO, and every function's under HSNO.
We're very conscious the EPA has been under-resourced for a long time,
and that has been a key factor
in terms of delays and processing, and in terms of having adequate
stewardship, a very important piece of legislation.
A
levy has to be equitable.
It has to be very purpose-driven. At the moment, we're not seeing that.
And even the supporting information that's been produced, it's still not clear what
that levy is going to cover.
And maybe I'll just open for questions then.
Yeah, okay. I've got a question just around
your interpretation of the levy
stuff that we're talking about.
You see the potential for
a levy on every ton of fertiliser being,
even though the fertiliser's been used for years and bought
in for years, that there may be a levy
introduced then.
Potentially, under scope, that's what it's kind of covering, and we
recognize the system needs to be supported.
Yeah.
It's in everybody's interest to have a well-functioning HSNO
system,
and how that is managed. We've got a
registration process, and we've got a world where people work under
group standards, where there's
They were established 30 years ago and
are still in place.
A lot of what hazard management is self-reporting, people identifying their
products, identifying the risks, meeting the needs, without limited
oversight. Then we've got the really strict process
of application that people go through in terms of trying to register products.
How do we apply a levy over that broad range of products and
different systems? And now I appreciate the intent as that comes
through the regulation, that that's where this detail is swapped out.
But it is hard, and as legislators, we actually have no idea whether it covers us.
We have no idea what's likely to be covered.
Yep.
Further questions?
That's the main flag for you.
I think it's the largest change-
Yeah
... I think.
The other amendments are moving towards improved efficiency.
We all support that, particularly around that international assessments.
But I think the levy is probably the critical thing to get right, because otherwise
we're setting up a system to fail, and that in terms of having an adequately
resourced EPA that can-
Absolutely
... implement the stuff.
Thank you.
Thank you. Any further questions?
No, there don't seem to be. Look, I appreciate you taking the time today,
Vera. Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Okay. Going to move on to Syngenta.
Good morning.
Morning.
We've allocated 10 minutes
for your presentation today,
so the time is in your hands. Just take
that your presentation, your submission's been read.
So away you go.
Thanks. Hi, my name's Nicola Smith.
I'm the Country Manager at Syngenta in New Zealand, and I'm here today with Dale
O'Neill, who's Head of Regulatory.
Syngenta is a global multinational R&D company that
develops
innovative products for farmers and growers throughout the world, like
herbicides, insecticides, fungicides, and
biologicals. In New Zealand, we specialize
in products that go into
horticulture, such as ones for kiwifruit growers,
apples, grapes, and vegetables, as well as in
cereals for wheat and barley.
I'd like to say thanks for the opportunity to come along here today
and also acknowledge that you've read our submission, and then we've only got a
short period of time, so we're going to summarize our points and
then open it up for questions.
Syngenta globally spend $1.8 billion
annually on R&D to develop new chemistry and
products for farmers throughout the world.
Unfortunately, for New Zealand, we're getting less and less of that investment
now purely because of our timeline it takes for
us to register a product. To give you an idea,
for us, it'll take nine years from when we first start doing our
R&D trials right through to when we get our first
sale of the product. So to break that down, we'll do
four years for
R&D trials, and we'll look at efficacy, crop safety,
residues, amongst other things. We will then
summarize that and then submit it into the regulators
after four years, and then five years later, we'll get the yes or
no if we can start selling it.
So the consequences of that for us
is that business cases don't reach the return on
investment milestones that we actually need to get a sustainable
return on investment. So there is bigger
consequences in that, though, because of course, the growers in New Zealand
are missing out. So it means they're missing out on newer products that have
got better human health properties, better
environmental profiles, more efficient efficacy,
as well as
better efficacy through the pest and disease.
So that has a major consequence for New
Zealand. Unfortunately, we're the same as all of the
R&D companies. Our face is exactly the same.
So I see this as an opportunity to fix that.
Thank you. I'll pass on to Dale.
Great. Thank you. So the most critical issue for Syngenta with the
current HazNo system is around the approval timeframe.
So it's just already been-
Mm-hmm
... spoken to in the advance submission.
So this is not only how long it takes to get that approval, but also
how certain it is around the timeframe.
So,
as was mentioned before, it's taking, at the moment, for a new molecule, around
about five years to get a new product registered under HazNo, and
this was our exact experience earlier this year when we were lucky enough to
get a new product approved.
When we first submitted that product, our expectation at the time, five years
ago, was that it would take around about 18 months
to two years. So that's the deterioration that's occurred over time, and that's the
uncertainty that we're currently experiencing.
So as Nicola's outlined, that five years for registration is only
part of the story.
We've also got to conduct our trials in New Zealand
to be able to bring this product to market.
So we're looking at an overall around about nine-year timeframe.
So that's really just become unacceptable for Syngenta and also for our end
users, the growers that are missing out
on these new tools. So-
This bill definitely presents a great opportunity to reset,
and to
change this so that we can get timely access to new solutions.
Within the bill, it's proposed that the time frames are moved
out to regulations, and we acknowledge the intent around this because it does
provide some flexibility.
But really based on our past experience, we're very concerned.
Essentially, the past failures by EPA to deliver
timely, certain approvals mean that we believe it's critical
that these approval's
time frames are really locked in, and not left to the regulations.
And that's going to bring the certainty that we as registrants, Syngenta,
our customers, and the end users really need.
So we really urge for that to be considered for the time
frame requirements to be tightened up more,
and incorporated into the primary legislation if possible.
If that's not something that you can achieve, then at the very least, make sure
that the report back commentary strongly states that these time frames
absolutely have to be
improved. Because if they don't, this whole process is going to
fail to deliver on what's been
promised.
We're also quite concerned about
a clause in the bill that would allow the
authority to vary time limits for any circumstance that they consider
reasonable.
We just feel that that's an open-ended
discretion and
would provide us no certainty at all that things are going to
improve. So just to summarise, our key asks of
the committee
is in retaining those approval time frames in the primary legislation, don't move
them to the regulations,
and restrain the EPA's ability to vary those time
limits. Extension should be by
exception only. So we thank you very much for the opportunity
to speak today, and we invite questions.
Suze, Denna, Steve, Andrew.
Excellent.
Saddle up.
All right.
Thank you very much. First off, just wanted to clarify, you talked about the
annual investing over 800 million.
Oh, one's investing and one's 200. Okay, no, I've just worked that out myself.
Thank you.
No, it was a typo.
Oh.
It's actually 1.8.
It was 1.8. All right.
We invest 1.8 million, billion US
dollars globally.
Yeah. Okay.
We listed in our submission was 800
million.
Yeah.
It was a typo.
Okay, great. Thank you.
Missed one.
Yeah. And then I'm just talking about the time frames.
So you talk about the four-year trials, and then now it's taking up to five years
to get it registered.
Mm-hmm.
And that obviously doesn't include the scientific research that's gone on
developing-
Absolutely
... on the back end of that.
Yeah.
So you're talking about a really long, like a lifetime.
Mm-hmm. 20 years.
Yeah, a really long time.
It'll take the end-
So you also mentioned that your expectation's 18 months to two
years. Is it clear that
over recent years it has taken a lot longer than it used to take?
Absolutely, it's taken a lot longer in recent years.
As I said, when we made that submission, I think it was around 2020, 2021,
we had been getting approvals through in around about 18 months, and in some cases
faster.
So it can be achieved, but it certainly hasn't been achieved any time
recently.
And is that for a similar natured chemical, so-
Absolutely.
Right.
A new active to New Zealand, so the full, it's category C under the EPA
pathways at the moment, and needs all of the robust
scientific assessment behind it.
And do you have any understanding of what's caused that?
It's delays within the EPA that have primarily driven that, so.
Thank you very much, and thanks for a great submission.
Yeah.
Thank you. My question
kind of relates to Suze's but relates to the previous question asked as well around
the, you mentioned that New Zealand is getting less and less
of the 1.8 billion US dollar research
investment. Can you quantify that?
No, I can't because it's commercially sensitive information.
Okay.
So I can't,
yeah, expand on that. But I can tell you that
we have projects that we submit for approval, and they
have been declined, and there's been numerous ones over
the past couple of years that we just can't reach the metrics that are
required and,
yeah, that's
missing out basically.
Yeah, just on the back of that. And so are those ones that you've submitted,
are they new?
Yes.
They're brand new ones?
New chemistries.
Not ones that are currently operating in other countries that-
No.
Okay.
Yeah.
Thank you.
Yep.
Steve.
Yeah. Thank you.
Succinct.
Pardon me?
Succinct, please.
Succinct. Yeah. You guys are one of the biggest agrichemical and
GMO seed companies in the world.
In terms of our natural cynicism about why you
obviously want less regulation, you want the ability to sell your
products with less restrictions.
Surely our regulator, whose job is to protect safety, ensure
that things are risk proportionate, no denying we need to
make things easier where there is low risk, I don't think anyone's in disagreement
on that.
Don't you think it's reasonable that the regulator should have the ability
to change time limits where it perceives there's a lack of
sufficient information for it to ensure safety of a new product?
So that where it perceives the circumstances are reasonable,
it should be able to say, "Hey, there's going to be a delay here because we can't
get clarity on whether
we have sufficient information on this being a
safe product to be released in New Zealand."
Yep. Syngenta supports the robust scientific assessment that the EPA needs to
make, and we don't want them to change that process.
But we just want them to be more efficient and process the
applications in a faster time frame, so.
I mean, I don't think any of us have got a problem with it being efficient.
Yeah.
Look, thank you very much. We're well over time. I'm sorry, Andrew.
So thanks very much-
Thank you
... for taking the time this morning.
Thank you.
Steve and I have a different description of succinct.
I'm sorry.
I was genuinely trying to be.
Right. Do we...
On Zoom? Right.
We've got FMC New Zealand Limited on Zoom.
We've got, Stephen Salter. Ah, there you are, Stephen.
Welcome to the Primary Production Select Committee.
We've allocated 10 minutes for you this morning.
Pack, your submission is read.
Fire away.
Thank you very much. Good morning, everyone.
Thanks for the opportunity to speak to the bill and to speak with you
this morning. My name's Stephen. I work for FMC.
Like Syngenta, we're an innovative global crop protection company.
So when I say innovative, what I mean is that we're at that
stage of discovering brand-new active
ingredients, both synthetic and biological, for our products.
So, really at that cutting edge of the technology.
The purpose and policy objectives of the bill are good,
but the specific proposals in it don't follow through and deliver on
those purposes and policy objectives, in our opinion,
and it really needs to.
The key problem on the HSNO side of the regulatory system at the
moment, for me, is really captured in the graph in
paragraph 31 of my submission. So I know there's just been some questions around
time frames-
Yes
... where it's been in the past, where it is now.
Mm.
Those time frames really have to improve.
They've become far too long,
especially for active ingredients, new ones,
which is what that graph refers to.
Much like Nicola was just saying before from Syngenta-
Mm
... that that really makes it very difficult on the business case
front to make the numbers work and make it commercially viable to bring those
innovations to New Zealand. It makes it so much harder.
We're already a relatively small market,
so we need to be-
I mean-
But we can't afford to take five years for just the EPA approval,
basically.
I'll do a very quick run-through of some of the topics that my submission touches
on, and then-
Please, please
... and then I'll take questions. So first of all, group standards-
49 years.
Oh, sorry, was there a question there?
No, no. Away you go.
So the bill doesn't currently include really any changes to
group standards, but one of the purposes is enacting the Ministry for
Regulation recommendations. And one of those is
that there's better
design and increased use of group standards.
Ministry for Regulation recommends
especially a couple of them, one for biologicals, one for methane inhibitors.
So, I've highlighted that. I think those should be added in there, a direction to
the EPA to develop those within 12 months.
I've also made another suggestion around products for use just
in research trials, small-scale ones.
That should really free up quite a bit of resource for the EPA, and I've put my
justification for that
in my submission. There are also some proposals to
change the current sections that deal with rapid assessment pathways.
The actual proposals themselves, in my view, make the
situation worse and less efficient rather than better,
so those need quite heavy revisions.
There's the introduction of a temporary approval trusted regulator
pathway. Now, in the first reading in the house, there was, I'm
paraphrasing a little here,
but there was a query by, I think it was Rachel Brooking, about,
well, in 2022, a new pathway was brought in.
You're saying that
that's not good enough. What's this?
So I go into quite a bit of detail
about what the situation is there, and I think what was
told to Select Committee at the time, and Parliament, was that this
absolutely would allow new active ingredients to come through, but then in
practice, it hasn't been implemented that way.
So rather than a temporary approval, which I don't think will change the business
case calculus much,
I think fix that would be the better option.
Just on waivers, I'm aware I've Steve's questioned this before.
The regulator should absolutely have the ability to waive time frames, but the way
that they've done it in the past hasn't always been appropriate.
Where they're waiting on me, the applicant, for information, as they are for one of
my applications now, absolutely, waive the time frames.
But they've had applications that
the rationale given has been just way too broad
around giving the EPA adequate time to do their assessment, and all
that's really done is lead to the trend from paragraph 31, that
graph of time frames ballooning.
I do mention a few other things, but the
submission's been read, so any questions?
We'll go to Andrew, since he missed out on- ... the last one.
I guess maybe you can answer this one.
In terms of that, whether or not the timelines are
in primary legislation or regulation-
Mm-hmm
...
I'm interested in where you sit on that one, and would you
be,
I guess, have you thought about the fact that if it's in regulation,
then it enables government and the minister
to alter those timelines or specify,
actually, I want this chemical,
the timeline reduced on these really important chemicals so
that the-
Things can move faster and actually send the direction to the
EPA to get on with
prioritize that. Whereas if it's in primary legislation, well, it takes
us two years to change that, so we're a lot less able
to adjust on that account. I mean, any thoughts on
that?
Yes. So the reason my preference is for the primary legislation
is because of a few bad experiences in the past.
So in 2018, the EPA consulted on fees.
To be honest, I don't really feel like they took submitter feedback on board
as fully as they should have.
So
I know it's the ministers who will be making the decision, but it's about making
sure that the substantive arguments reach all the way to those
decision-makers for setting those time frames.
One thing I've included is that if they are going to be in secondary legislation,
then set some pretty
strict guardrails about what they should look like, those time frames, and that
they should aim to return to the sort of
2013 to 2017 performance levels, because that's a
very different scenario for getting a business case approved
than it is today.
Thank you. Any further questions?
Great submission, though. Thank you very much.
Thanks very much, Steven. We appreciate you taking the time today.
Thank you.
Right.
Yeah.
Is the-- Oh, yes, they are, the RNZSPCA.
That relates to this, where they said they were to just shift the strategic
focus.
Morning. Welcome to the select committee.
Morning.
You have 10 minutes.
Thank you.
So far away as with the other ones.
Take your submissions being read.
Yeah.
Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you very much for having us here today.
We really appreciate the opportunity to come talk to you about our position on the
HASNO bill.
I'm Anya Dale. I'm the Chief Scientific Officer for the SPCA, and I'm joined with
Christine Sumner, Senior Scientific Officer, who specifically
looks at
the whole HASNO ACVM area, along with many others.
So SPCA sees value in amending the animal, the
HASNO
bill, and we've heard many examples from submitters today
about lengthy delays and uncertainties and issues around
time frames. So we have, we absolutely acknowledge that.
But we do think there needs to be a precautionary approach that prioritizes
animal welfare alongside efforts to improve
efficiency with the HASNO bill.
And today we're going to focus on the proposed risks and benefits to the
welfare of animals,
particularly around the HASNO Amendment bill that, uh,
and
specific areas that we want to focus on are those impacted by genetic
technologies.
So numerous amendments in this bill provide the authority
with powers to change the status of a new organism,
including genetically modified organisms.
Now, genetic technologies have been applied to animals for lots of different
reasons, including disease models for humans,
xenotransplantation, and drug development.
They've also been used for increasing productivity, disease resistance, heat
tolerance in farm species, hornlessness in cattle, reduction in
disease, and also poor conformation of dogs.
So we recognize there may be potential value in using
genetic technologies to improve the health and welfare of animals.
But we're concerned that the current bill will lead to the
proliferation of genetic technologies that may
negatively impact the welfare of animals.
So we'll take our submission as read, and we'll be using the rest of the time just
to highlight a few points and then allow time for questions.
Steve.
Oh, we're still going.
We're still going.
We're still going. Is that all right?
Go.
Yeah. So the use of animals in research and technology that would involve
genetic technologies is currently regulated under the Animal Welfare Act, Part
6. Part 6 also requires the application of the three Rs ethical
principles. This is where we replace animals when we can, we reduce the number
of animals as long as we meet our scientific objectives, and we refine what
we do to minimize the harm we may cause to animals in research and testing.
Genetic technologies may actually help us achieve these principles, and
that's a very positive thing. But we also know genetic
technologies research and testing also can undermine these
principles. Even though there could be refinement in some of the things we
do to animals, they are subjected to multiple invasive
procedures in terms of genetic engineering.
Genetic technologies actually take a large number of animals, so they
might establish a new genetic line, and this can take many, many
animals to keep that line going. So there's kind of a give and take when it comes
to these ethical principles in genetic technologies.
But one important thing we're concerned about are animals that are
currently heavily commonly used in research, including
with genetic technologies that are not protected under the Animal Welfare Act.
These would be larval stage fish. So zebrafish are very commonly
used, but when they are in the larval stage, they are technically not
defined as an animal under the Animal Welfare Act.
The problem we have in many around the world is that they do
show signs that they are sentient, they have behaviors.
So we think this is a gap in the current legislation that does not protect these
animals. We are concerned that increasing genetic
technologies in this country will actually increase the number of animals
that are subjected to research and not protected under the act.
Other concerns we have are the unintended consequences of
genetic technologies. We call these off-target events.
So these are the things that happen, we didn't intend this to happen, but they do.
Now, these might not be harmful, but we have many cases of where they
are. So in efforts to increase productivity of animals,
you might
also be selecting for increased lameness, body, leg
deformities. We see a lot of difficult birth that impacts mom and
the offspring. There's decreased lifespan.
So there's a lot of problems that can happen.
We're also concerned that the modification of animals for disease
resistance and productivity will lead to the intensification of farming,
and this can be an overall net negative welfare on
animals.
Another concern we have that's commonly used, even when the intention is to
improve welfare, so there's a very famous example of where genetic
technologies introduced DNA
into dairy cows and calves, so that they would not produce horns.
So they took beef DNA and introduced that genetically, because it can take a
long time to do this through selective breeding, and not all farmers want to do
this. However, when calves have the ability to grow
horns, these are often removed at a very young age.
This is a known painful procedure. It's invasive.
So the idea that you could alter the animal so they didn't produce these horns was
seen as a win. Unfortunately, during this process, there was poor
regulatory oversight over the actual technology.
It inadvertently introduced antibiotic resistance DNA as
well.
Mm-hmm.
So this isn't a critique to try to improve welfare
with genetic technologies. It is a call to make sure the technology
itself is regulated. We can't overlook that there could be problems
we don't anticipate. And finally,
while we're here, the current bill does not include changes to the hazardous
substances fireworks regulations under the HASNO Act.
This regulates the private sale of fireworks with very few
restrictions. We advocate, we publicly
advocate for a ban on the private sale and use of fireworks due to
significant harms they cause to animals such as death, injury, and
psychological trauma. With that, I'll leave it.
So we acknowledge the purpose of the HASNO Act.
Doesn't actually implicitly include animal welfare, but we think
it's a missed opportunity that it should have been included in
the drafted amendments.
And we're concerned that it's going to deregulate and exacerbate the current animal
welfare harms associated with genetic technologies.
And so we need more regulation to protect animal welfare, not less.
So therefore, we're asking the select committee,
four things. Please take a precautionary approach to the use of genetic
technologies.
We advocate for a full animal welfare assessment and
also evaluating the long-term health and
welfare benefits and also potential harms.
So please take a precautionary approach.
The second is,
as Christine mentioned, a lot of testing happens
on
larval zebrafish.
You don't have to count them as an animal under the act till they get to day 30.
Science has showed us very, very clearly from
between day three and day five that they would feel pain.
And so we think that this is a gap that needs to also be
corrected along with this amendment.
We also think that
without having these multi-generational
phenotypic assessments
in the research and testing phase
is also a lost opportunity before they go into commercial farms.
So we absolutely see if you have a robust process, we
are okay provided that the welfare is looked after.
And we're also, given that the HASNO bill has been opened,
we would also like you to consider also including a
regulation in relation to making fireworks restricted in
terms of sale. And we thank you very much
for the opportunity to speak, and we're happy to take questions.
Steve and then Rachel.
Given that the-
Make it quick, Steve
... sort of horror story of what happened at Ruakura with genetically modified
cows happened under the existing HASNO Act.
Yep.
You're concerned that because of the unique consequences you
get from genetically modifying animals than legislation that manages
that should specifically have clauses that protect
animal welfare.
Yes, or it can refer to the Animal Welfare Act, and there can be specific
clauses in the Animal Welfare Act.
Often these legislation pieces all talk together, and when it
is genetic technologies for animals, that there is a very
robust animal welfare assessment for multi-generations before it's released
into commercial herds.
Great. Thank you. Rachel.
My question is essentially a follow on that.
Have you actually got, because you've mentioned the amendments of the Animal
Welfare Act, have you actually had a go at drafting what those amendments could
look like,
both to the HASNO bill and to the Animal Welfare Act?
And would you be able to maybe supply those to the committee?
Yes. We will do that, and we will send them through.
Yep. Okay. Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you. Got 30 seconds if anyone has a
10-second question.
Oh.
You know it's not possible.
Can't do a 10-second question.
Can't do a 10-second question. Let's go.
Say thanks very much.
Thanks very much.
Thank you very much for your submissions.
Thank you for your time.
Yeah, thanks.
See you this afternoon.
You will indeed.
If we could
skip round the agenda a bit here now, and we're going to go to
the Methane Science Cohort.
Mr. Chair, is there any chance of a
pee break at some point.
Yes.
There we go.
We will be straight after the next submitter-
We're human beings
... will take a break.
We've got two more.
Yes.
So,
welcome
to the select committee. We've allocated 5 minutes, 10
minutes, sorry.
Yep.
So the time is yours.
I think I'm on. Yep.
Okay, so, firstly, my name is Michael Kay.
So I want to be able to
speak to this today.
I got this in order because I had it stapled wrong.
Okay, so let me start.
Thank you for the chance to speak to our submission on HSNO.
The regulation designs we believe that best supports growth in exports and
maintain environmental protection must focus on trade access,
traceability and transparency, evidence-based science to secure
progress, opportunity in a current market benchmark.
It must absolutely contain no ambiguity.
A fragile relationship with the right regulatory settings and effectiveness is a
hard stop of things like M. bovis, infant formula contamination or
foot-and-mouth.
New Zealand farming now has prime market access and reputation.
In our opinion, despite the most reliable scientific evidence that New
Zealand dairy carbon footprint per kilo of milk
solids, for example, is 0.74 kgs of milk
solids,
of carbon, sorry, per milk solids, versus Nestle's 2 kgs
for carbon footprint.
Milk solids buried and not championed.
Despite what seems unjustified anxiety about being proud of our best-in-the-world
grass-fed natural farming system, the free market has spoken as a trusted
farming family brand.
Photo nutrient density or low spray residues are markets that our
flexibility and our agility and individual producer choice
to pounce on are only held back by what seems a distracted
scientific community holding us back based on the best market
research absent from this bill at this stage.
This mindset, if you'll excuse me for argument's sake,
if we all leaned into this instead of GMOs, to holding
on tight to what we have, secures the capital and capacity
to build at scale more production, regardless of
geopolitical headwinds or energy shocks.
The architecture, architects, or influencers of the HSNO
have achieved the reverse.
Where we want traceability, we find products and their scientific evidence will
disappear behind patent walls.
With the bill's express instructions to the state to keep the producers
blind to what we as farmers are supposed to disclose,
that is in our products.
Where we want protection and security of our products that have taken over 150
years of breeding and innovation and survival of market shocks
without subsidies, we find subsidized products demand
impunity from liability from damage to our farms and our
products using the law that is ours, not theirs.
Where we want transparency, trust, and consistency with international laws and
norms, we find the same ambiguity that was the core feature of the
stalled gene technology bill.
We consider at this point the process of
evaluating HSNO, the bill's
biggest fault may be that instead of it being built by the industry selling
70 billion worth of products, its catastrophic failure to deliver
inescapably as it was built by those desperate to sell us
products, which is in part why we came to the unanimous agreement the bill should
not progress.
We are very mindful there's a statement out there that we are missing out.
Our evaluation on the stable of GMO products reveals that they have not
tried to proceed through the current HSNO.
HME rye, for example, is not, in our opinion, based on the many papers written over
its 20 years of being engineered and re-engineered and rebranded and
re-patented, safe, or is it better than what already exists.
Ava Rye is a high natural sugar grass, and we worry because of several years
of funding to manufacture a social license for GMOs to farmers
and consumers that this natural product and others, because of ambiguity,
suffers lack of adoption into the market, as will many unless we
pivot quickly to protect and highlight our strengths and stop
subsidizing weakness. We worry that the methane mitigation
product ingredients already released and paused in other jurisdictions
have a significant risk factor, especially treating perfectly healthy,
productive livestock and making them sick and suffer.
But as an obvious safety signal, in the situation where
livestock suffered metabolic problems, stopped producing milk, and
presented high distress and daily feed dose was terminated by the farmers
despite pressure not to from the government and from
the company the farmers supply milk.
We could not terminate dosing ours, as ours is a bolus
across our entire herd. The bolus would have to be extracted through keyhole
surgery. The survival rate or success may be low.
If elected not to treat
or to extract, the poor health will continue until the bolus has
expired or been self-ruminated out.
As a group, we have not publicly advocated support for Halta,
neither a hazardous substance nor a GMO.
Obviously, we agree with the premise.
For many applications, this may indeed offer significant benefits
for the environment and productivity.
But will this push to force GMOs into our toolbox affect
that uptake?
It also is a choice that does not affect neighbors, and we
reject the myth that the extreme burden of proof that there can be
a farmer who farms a GMO next to another who doesn't
without contamination, especially with GMO sprays or
grasses or GMO endophytes. This is a completely
unscientific statement. This feature of horizontal transfer
is one where developers have sought to embrace it And now
market the fault as a pest control via sterilization using
gene silencing or GMO engineering through a
vector.
Respectfully, we suggest the committee consider the money
allocated over several years into psychological warfare
to adopt GMO has had the opposite effect on consumers.
It's galvanized our rejection of them in farming,
where we can clearly see GMO farming as a loss-leading subsidies way of
farming, highly dependent on government support via crop insurance
and government bailouts. It removes the farmer's ability to seek premium
markets, such as we all cherish, especially now.
Unfortunately, this has bounced back across all departments in government and
convinced them.
It's also caused significant hesitation and anxiety or
confusion to back our scientifically proven natural farming,
grass-fed New Zealand pure, despite the market, consumers
throughout the developed world speaking so loudly in favor of our
pure, natural grass-fed products.
Sorry, it's a bit of a range.
That's all right.
Right. Any questions?
No.
Well, thank you for your time this morning, Michael.
Your
submission will be considered by the committee when we come to
deliberations.
Yeah. No, that would be wonderful. Thank you.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you.
Thank you. Good work.
Yeah, but then we buy some.
Okay, so we have
Te Waka Kai Ora who had on our agenda looked
like we were going to be in person, but they're going to be on Zoom.
Okay, all right.
So we'll just wait for them to hook in.
Good morning. Welcome to the Primary Production Select Committee.
We've allocated 10 minutes for your presentation.
Take your submission as read, so that
the committee could ask questions.
The time is yours. Away you go.
Morning, all. Thank you so much for the opportunity to be heard, and thank you
so much.
Just a gentle reminder, Te Waka Kai Ora is
responsible for the Hua Parakore system.
That is the world's first indigenous verification system
to verify kai and kai-related products.
It was started quite a long time ago, and we have
nine
takua across the motu,
and nine mangai. The mangai are responsible for the
regions. And so we're very active in promoting the values of Hua
Parakore, the value of organics, and
reclaiming some of our indigenous knowledge.
So
just want to start by talking a bit about the Te Tiriti o Waitangi and
how we strongly support retaining sections of the HASNO Act without
amendment.
And these provisions provide principles of Te Tiriti o Waitangi,
protect the environment, and particularly the precautionary approach.
So the precautionary principle is very
important in Aotearoa because of our unique biodiversity
and island ecosystems. And there's been lots of significant environmental
damage
from introduced species, examples such as rabbits, possums, stoats,
ferrets.
And these kind of demonstrate that ecological systems are complex and unintended
consequences can emerge over decades, and that
uncertainty exists.
We feel like the bill weakens these protections by increasing regulatory
discretion, reducing public notification requirements, and
does not satisfy Te Tiriti obligations.
So want to be recognized as right holders, not stakeholders.
When we think about Wai 262 and
indigenous rights, we are urging the committee to consider the
findings of the Waitangi Tribunal's Wai 262 report,
He Hua Aotearoa Tini,
which still remains one of the most comprehensive
examination of Maori rights and interest in relation to biodiversity.
And the Tribunal recognized that Maori have enduring relationships and
responsibilities.
So really want the committee
feel like this bill doesn't really meet that standard.
Yeah.
We also would like
our values
respected and acknowledged as Hua Parakore, which we have these
key Maori principles that we adhere to that ensure
that kai products and
things to do with whenua are
done with integrity, and we feel like this bill kind of reduces that.
So we submit on the principles of Hua Parakore and Kaitiakitanga
as substantial
decision-making criteria rather than secondary cultural factors.
So I want to talk a little bit about
what happens overseas and what's happened overseas in the past, and so
how can Aotearoa, New Zealand learn from some of
those examples. And so, across the world, there's been lots
of decisions that have affected genetic resources and biodiversity and traditional
food systems. And perhaps
Aotearoa could learn from these and be a little bit more
forthcoming in not introducing things
that don't protect the environment.
And a lot of these concerns and others are reflected through free, prior and
informed consent. We want to see
New Zealand recognized as a country that learns from these experiences, not
necessarily repeats them. So I think it's a good opportunity to
have a moment where we're not tolerating this
So,
just urging the committee to recognise Māori as right
holders and not stakeholders, and incorporating the findings
and recommendations from Y262 on Māori rights and interests.
Please retain and strengthen the precautionary approach.
This seems to be our only
way that we can ensure that uncertainty is not necessarily mitigated,
and strengthen civil liability provisions to ensure polluters bear the cost
of contamination, not our atua,
not our people, and those that rely on
traditional food sources.
And
want to also
acknowledge the Hua Parakore Māori producers and the sovereignty
guardians, those who work with natural fiber, fiber techniques, Tūngā
Māori, and indigenous food sovereignty
be formally recognized as affected parties and/or has no decision-making related
to genetically modified organisms.
And that also, it's not just Māori.
We have a lot of tangata tiriti that are Hua Parakore verified
producers. And so it's a framework that's appealing to Māori,
not just Māori, but tangata tiriti as well, who
are joining us to support and uphold our
indigenous rights.
Thank you so much for
allowing us to submit today. And thank you very much.
Thank you, Moko. We've got a question from Steve Abel.
Kia ora, Moko. Thank you for your
excellent, very clear submission.
Do you perceive the current changes in the act, aside from obviously the
change to the treaty clause, which seems to be what was given to the
station.
Do you perceive the current changes to be
weakening your confidence that this is
a strategy that protects
your ability to produce food on the terms that you
outline?
Looks like we may have lost her.
I don't think she is.
Sorry.
I'm back. Hi, Steve. Nice to see you.
Kia ora. How are you? Did you hear my question? I'm not sure if you heard me.
No. Do you mind repeating it? Sorry.
Yeah. Sorry. Thank you for your submission, Moko.
And do you perceive that the current changes in the act,
as well as the change to the treaty clause, but the broader changes,
weaken your current ability to produce on the
terms that you outline?
Yeah. Absolutely. It
also probably removes organic Hua
Parakore, all those verification certification systems
from being able to uphold the highest integrity.
So, I think it will have a massive impact on the organics, the
ability to export organics and to claim as organics with
what's being proposed.
Right. So you see it as
more radical than it's perhaps been sold to us as.
Absolutely.
Okay. Thank you.
Any other questions?
Go ahead, Steve.
I've got one quick one.
Right.
Yeah. Perhaps for the committee, can you outline what
products that they might be familiar with that you guys produce?
Oh, you lost them again.
All right. Well,
we will
take a break till
10:35.
And then come back for the officials.
And then come back for the officials and
the next
series- This is the only break we really have